Updates to 00b-additional-approaches.md (#423)
AlexsLemonade/training-modules: RNA-seq/00b-additional_approaches.md

For your reference, we've put together what we might teach if we had more time or if they required fewer computational resources.
This is intended to be an introduction to these approaches and a "jumping off point" for further reading or experimentation.
We present them in order of increasing difficulty and/or departure from what is presented in training.

> ### Link to pre-prepared datasets

Reviewer: I don't think we intend for `link-data.sh` to be publicly facing and we may not provide `scripts` to participants. Looking at [contributing](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/training-modules/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#linking-shared-files), my interpretation of:

> Because this script is also used to set up directories for training

is that we will use this script to prep folders that go into `/shared/skel` (https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/training-admin/issues/447). I expect that participants will already have access to anything that calling `link-data.sh` would get them.

The comment on #358

> we will likely want to reference that more files will be available to training participants (look at `scripts/link-data.sh` or rather run it and see what's in `RNA-seq/data`!)

is a comment for us/the person implementing it. Are there QC files that we will not cover during instruction that folks will have access to? We should make sure to mention them here. (My initial recommendation would be in the `Running MultiQC on the gastric cancer samples` section.)

Reviewer 2: > I don't think we intend for `link-data.sh` to be publicly facing and we may not provide `scripts` to participants. Looking at [contributing](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/training-modules/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#linking-shared-files), my interpretation of:
> 
> > Because this script is also used to set up directories for training
> 
> is that we will use this script to prep folders that go into `/shared/skel` ([AlexsLemonade/training-admin#447](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/training-admin/issues/447)). I expect that participants will already have access to anything that calling `link-data.sh` would get them.

Yes, this was my intent. I do not think we should provide `scripts` to users (and probably not `setup` folders, though they can look at them on the website)?

Author: Gotcha. Yeah I didn't understand that part. Well that makes that part a whole lot shorter! :+1:

This can be helpful to get an overall picture of the samples in your experiment.
For example, fastp reports statistics before and after it processes samples.
If you were to perform _quality trimming_ with fastp and look at the before and after information across samples, it may tell you that, after trimming, a large portion of your reads were too short and were filtered out.
That's likely information you'd want to know when performing downstream analyses.
MultiQC supports the three tools we present in the bulk RNA-seq module: FastQC, fastp, and Salmon.
In addition, MultiQC is not limited to RNA-seq data; the website has example reports for Hi-C data and whole genome sequencing.

MultiQC is installed on the RStudio Server we use for training.
If you want to run it on the gastric cancer samples, we provide instructions below.
Note that you will not have FastQC or fastp output for most samples, so there will be some information missing from the report.

#### Running MultiQC on the gastric cancer samples

There are datasets already uploaded to the RStudio Server that you may want use for practicing these approaches or other techniques we've discussed.

> For running MultiQC, take a look in the `~/shared-data/training-modules/RNA-seq/QC/` directory to see all the datasets you could run MultiQC on. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For running MultiQC, take a look in the `~/shared-data/training-modules/RNA-seq/QC/` directory to see QC results from all of the datasets we have processed for training. 
```

```bash
multiqc \
  ~/shared-data/training-modules/RNA-seq/QC/gastric-cancer \
  data/gastric_cancer/salmon_quant/ \
  --outdir QC/gastric_cancer
```

Once this completes, you should have a report at `QC/gastric_cancer/multiqc_report.html`.

## Decoy sequence-aware selective alignment with Salmon

> The folks that created Salmon demonstrated that transcript abundance estimates from lightweight mapping approaches like Salmon can differ from abundance estimates derived from traditional alignment approaches in experimental data ([Srivastava _et al._ 2019.](https://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13059-020-02151-8)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Transcript abundance estimates from lightweight mapping approaches like Salmon can differ from abundance estimates derived from traditional alignment approaches in experimental data ([Srivastava _et al._ 2020.](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-020-02151-8)).
```

This differs from the takeaway of most prior work comparing lightweight mapping and traditional alignment; this is very likely due to the typical focus on _simulated data_ rather than experimental data.

> The authors introduced a new approach termed "selective alignment" that is less computationally costly than traditional alignment while still offering improvements over lightweight mapping.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To provide better results than lightweight mapping alone, Salmon includes a "selective alignment" method that is less computationally costly than traditional alignment while still offering improvements over lightweight mapping.
```

> The current version of Salmon (as of writing this) allows users to input sequences from unannotated genomic loci that are similar to annotated transcripts, termed decoy sequences, to avoid falsely mapping fragments that arise from these unannotated regions to transcripts.
> This is termed a `salmon_partial_sa_index` [here](https://github.com/COMBINE-lab/salmon/tree/91091fc3650a3220f657a9f31616916513f0ad02#pre-computed-decoy-transcriptomes).
> As of `v1.0.0`, you can use the _full genome_ as decoy ([ref](https://github.com/COMBINE-lab/salmon/tree/91091fc3650a3220f657a9f31616916513f0ad02#pre-computed-decoy-transcriptomes)).
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To apply the selective alignment method, you will need to first have an index that includes not only the transcripts of interest, but also a set of other potentially mapped sequences. 
Instructions on creating such an index can be found in [the Salmon documentation](https://salmon.readthedocs.io/en/latest/salmon.html#preparing-transcriptome-indices-mapping-based-mode).
One option is to include "decoy sequences" in Salmon index from genomic loci that are similar to annotated transcripts, to avoid falsely mapping fragments that arise from these unannotated regions to the transcripts of interest.
Alternatively (recommended), you can use the [_full genome_ as a decoy](https://combine-lab.github.io/alevin-tutorial/2019/selective-alignment/)
```

```bash
multiqc \

>   QC/gastric_cancer \

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  ~/shared-data/training-modules/RNA-seq/QC/gastric-cancer \
```

Author: Thought we might want to use their own directory here but I guess making the example parallel is less confusing.

Reviewer 2: I think if we are trying to demonstrate the full power of this fully operational multiQC, we would include all the QC data. But I could be convinced that the smaller set is fine!

Author: I think what you suggested here is better.

```bash
multiqc \

>   gastric_cancer/QC \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  QC/gastric_cancer \
```

was correct: https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/training-modules/blob/334daec41e862c8f60c6084fcbaf4053129ad55e/scripts/link-data.sh#L46

Author: Oh I thought all the directories were getting changed to project folder first?

Reviewer 2: Honestly, that might have been a better choice, but it isn't what we did. But I probably change my mind every few weeks about this. The key is to be consistent, which I think we now are?

Author: OH I see. `data` and `QC` are their own levels.

Author: ¯\_(ツ)_/¯ It's fine I think.

> Srivastava et al. demonstrate that transcript abundance estimates from lightweight mapping approaches like Salmon can differ from abundance estimates derived from traditional alignment approaches in experimental data.

Author: Ah that's not the tximeta link that I thought you were referring to in that comment. I deleted a different one.

> Srivastava et al. demonstrate that transcript abundance estimates from lightweight mapping approaches like Salmon can differ from abundance estimates derived from traditional alignment approaches in experimental data.

Author: I'm not entirely sure what your vision for re-writing this paragraph is, but I tried to make it mostly passable for now.

The current version of Salmon (as of writing this) allows users to input sequences from unannotated genomic loci that are similar to annotated transcripts, termed decoy sequences, to avoid falsely mapping fragments that arise from these unannotated regions to transcripts.
This is termed a `salmon_partial_sa_index` [here](https://github.com/COMBINE-lab/salmon/tree/91091fc3650a3220f657a9f31616916513f0ad02#pre-computed-decoy-transcriptomes).
As of `v1.0.0`, you can use the _full genome_ as decoy ([ref](https://github.com/COMBINE-lab/salmon/tree/91091fc3650a3220f657a9f31616916513f0ad02#pre-computed-decoy-transcriptomes)).

### Why don't we use decoy-aware selective alignment in training?

We select the methods we cover in training in part because it is feasible to run them on a standard laptop used for scientific computing if necessary.
Some laptops (including ones your instructors own!) are not well-equipped to run `salmon quant` with indices that include the decoy sequence information; they are considerably larger than the indices we use in training, which are cDNA-only indices.

### How can I try it out if I'm interested?

> We have not extensively explored the memory and runtime requirements for selective alignment-mode, but we have successfully run human samples using Salmon with an index that includes partial decoy sequences on a Linux Desktop with 64 GB of RAM.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We have not extensively explored the memory and runtime requirements for the selective alignment mode, but we have successfully run human samples using Salmon with an index that includes partial decoy sequences on a Linux Desktop with 64 GB of RAM.
```
